ASSOCIATED PRESS

Dec.  28, 1999 | SEATTLE -- The mayor has canceled the city's New
Year's Eve celebration in the park below its landmark Space  Nee-
dle,  citing  the possibility of terrorist acts in a city rattled
by demonstrations and a border arrest.

"It is safer to be prudent," Mayor Paul Schell said Monday. "This
is already an unprecedented, unpredictable New Year's, and we did
not want to take chances with public safety, no matter how remote
the threat might seem."

International  media  coverage  of the event makes it "impossible
for federal officials to rule out the area as  a  terrorist  tar-
get," he said.

However, the mayor said federal officials have not advised him of
any specific threat.

The city's nerves were strained in recent weeks by the  sometimes
violent  protests during the World Trade Organization conference.
Both Schell and Police Chief Norm Stamper  came  under  fire  for
their  handling  of  the  demonstrations. Stamper later announced
that he will resign.

And on Dec. 14, an Algerian man was arrested at Port Angeles  and
charged  with smuggling nitroglycerin and other explosive materi-
als across the border  from  Canada.   Investigators  said  Ahmed
Resssam had reserved a motel room near the Space Needle.

An  estimated  50,000  people  had been expected to gather in the
75-acre Seattle Center park below the Needle,  located  near  the
city's  downtown.  The  605-foot  landmark,  built  for  the 1962
World's Fair, has become a traditional gathering  point  for  New
Year's Eve revelers.

Afternoon  concerts  and  a circus performance will take place as
planned Friday, and fireworks -- the centerpiece of the millenni-
um  party -- will still pour from the Needle at midnight. But the
center will be cleared of people and the gates locked at 6  p.m.,
the Seattle Post-Intelligencer reported today.

Only  a  private party in the restaurant at the top of the Needle
will be allowed, he said.  The restaurant had been reserved  more
than four years ago.

Schell's  decision  is  the  latest in a string of moves to scale
back the city's once grand ambitions for the event.

A plan to set aflame 14 giant wood-and-papier-mache sculptures --
part  of a $120,000 project -- was canceled last Wednesday, while
the mayor's plan to cover nine bridges and four parks in  colored
lights  was scaled back to just one bridge because of cash short-
ages.

The city pulled the plug on the fire sculptures  after  officials
decided  the  large blazes would be inappropriate in light of the
fears of terrorism.

Artist Carl Smool questioned what he called the "school marm-ish"
decision.

"Are  we  that  paranoid that we really think there's some right-
wing Armageddon conspiracy?" Smool asked.

(C) 1999 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. The  informa-
tion contained in the AP News report may not be published, broad-
cast, rewritten or redistributed without the  prior  written  au-
thority of The Associated Press.

- - - - - - - - - - - -





























































