 WASHINGTON - A cash-strapped NASA says it is having to
 scuttle plans to send a robot rover to search for life on
 Mars in 2001, but hopes to launch it a few years later. 
 
 The 2001 Mars mission originally was planned to include a
 sophisticated ground crawling vehicle called Athena to seek
 out rocks that might contain evidence of life. It also was to
 collect Mars rocks that could be picked up and returned to
 Earth by a later mission. 
 
 But a NASA official said Tuesday that a budget squeeze has
 forced engineers to simplify the 2001 mission. 
 
 Carl Pilcher, NASA's science director for solar system
 exploration, said three experiments designed to help prepare
 for a manned landing on Mars were added to the 2001 mission
 payload. Though the experiments are part of a different NASA
 program, he said, the Mars program was being forced to pay
 for their cost. 
 
 It also became clear that the development cost and total
 weight of the Athena rover were exceeding earlier
 predictions. The added weight would have necessitated a more
 powerful and expensive rocket booster to launch the mission. 
 
 Pilcher said Congress might restore $20 million required for
 the manned landing experiments that could make it possible to
 include on the 2001 lander an engineering twin of the
 Sojourner rover that flew on Mars Pathfinder, the robot craft
 that landed on the Red Planet last summer. 
 
 In any case, Pilcher said the 2001 mission will include some
 Athena experiments designed to help locate evidence of life
 on Mars. In addition to a panoramic camera, the 2001 lander
 craft will include a spectrometer that can detect the
 presence in the Mars soil and rock of carbon and sulfur
 chemicals that can be associated with life. 
 
 When placed on the Athena rover in the 2003 and 2005
 missions, these experiments will help guide the
 sample-collecting vehicle to rocks with the highest
 probability of containing the residue of life. 
 
 Plans are for the 2005 mission to bring Mars samples back to
 Earth. 
 
 The 2001 mission, meanwhile, may provide key information
 required for the eventual landing of astronauts on Mars. 
