(GUARDIAN)  John  German  has barely had time to catch his breath
all week between appearances on TV news channel and radio  phone‐
in shows. Heâs an unlikely media star, not a pop singer or reali‐
ty TV contestant, but a grey‐haired  automotive  engineer  thrust
into  the global spotlight after he and his colleagues were cred‐
ited with helping uncover one of the biggest ever corporate scan‐
dals.

âWe  really  didn't  expect to find anything,â German said of his
research that found Volkswagen had installed sophisticated  soft‐
ware  designed  to  cheat strict emission tests across the world.
His simple test â checking the  carâs  emissions  on  real  roads
rather  than  in  lab test conditions â led to the resignation of
VWâs chief executive after the German company was forced to admit
it  installed âdefeat devicesâ in 11m cars. The scandal has wiped
more than â¬24bn ($26.8bn) off VWâs market value.

Many questions remain but one thing is clear to German:  âIt  was
not an accident,â he said. âA lot of work has gone into this.â

When  German  finally found a moment of peace this week he called
his wife in Ann Arbor, Michigan. âShe said: âYou know youâve made
it  now,  you  can  retire  and  be very happyâ,â German told the
Guardian as he prepared to board a plane back to Michigan after a
week  in the spotlight in Washington DC. âNo, no, no, I canât af‐
ford to yet,â German told his disappointed wife.

He may have helped uncover one of the worldâs  biggest  corporate
scandals,  but  German earns a modest salary as US co‐lead of the
International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT) a small non‐
profit  organisation dedicated to helping to reduce vehicle emis‐
sions and has an annual budget of just $12m.

âIt has been totally overwhelming,â German said of the global in‐
terest  in  his research this week. âIâve been doing nothing else
[but responding to the media and politicians] for 12 hours a  day
since  Friday,â  when  US  regulators  announced  their  findings
against VW based on Germanâs research] âWeâre a  small  organisa‐
tion  that primarily deals with information on diesel filters, so
this is unprecedented and overwhelming.  Advertisement

âAs an organisation that is trying to reduce  emissions  and  im‐
prove  efficiency it is always gratifying to see results from our
work, but we never dreamed we would have this kind of impact.â

German explained that the idea to carry out the  test,  which  he
described  as  âvery ordinaryâ, came from Peter Mock, a colleague
in Europe, who noticed discrepancies  in  the  emissions  of  the
diesel  VW Passat and VW Jetta. He said they decided to carry out
on‐the‐road tests in the US as the emissions regulations are much
stricter  than in the EU. They expected the cars to pass and they
could use this as proof to show Europeans that it was possible to
run diesels with cleaner emissions.

German, who has a degree in physics from the University of Michi‐
gan and said he âgot over halfway through an MBA before  he  came
to  his  sensesâ,  sought out the assistance of the West Virginia
Universityâs Center for Alternative Fuels, Engines and Emissions.
The  WVU  provided  a  portable  emission measurement system that
could be put in the carâs boot (trunk)  with  an  attached  probe
placed in the exhaust pipe.

Then  German  sourced  a  Passat,  Jetta and a BMW X5 (which also
showed emissions  discrepancies  in  Europe)  and  âhad  a  drive
aroundâ.  âThe  VWs were massively exceeding their official emis‐
sions readings in normal driving conditions, which was completely
inexplicable  and  totally surprised us,â German said.  The Volk‐
swagen emissions scandal explained Read more

Thinking it must be a technical error, the  tests  were  expanded
and  the cars were driven more than 1,200 miles from San Diego to
Seattle â almost the entire length of the west coast of the US.

The VWs nitrogen oxide emissions â which  creates  smog  and  has
been  linked  to  increased  asthma attacks and other respiratory
illnesses â still exceeded the US standards by up  to  35  times.
The BMW X5 was within the regulated range.

Arvind  Thiruvengadam, a research assistant professor at WVU, who
conducted the tests said: âWe were  doubting  ourselves  and  our
procedures and making sure to double check that we were not doing
anything wrong. We did so much testing we couldnât possibly doing
the same mistake again and again.

âWe  were like âOK, weâre going to write a lot of journal papers,
and weâll be happy if three people read these  journal  papers,ââ
he told National Public Radio last week. âThatâs our happiness at
that point.â Advertisement

German published the research in May 2014 and handed it  over  to
the  Environment  Protection Agency (EPA). âThere was an expecta‐
tion that they would find out what was causing  the  higher‐than‐
expected  emissions,â he said. âWe did send a courtesy copy to VW
to say âvehicles B and C are your vehicles and you might like  to
knowâ, we had no response.â

There  was  no response from the EPA either, but keen‐eyed German
noticed an EPA press release in which VW agreed to recall  almost
500,000 vehicles in December 2014 to reinstall software, which it
said would solve the higher‐than‐expected emissions.

However, a couple of months later the  California  Air  Resources
Board (Carb) carried out spot checks and discovered that the âde‐
feat deviceâ software â used to dramatically reduces nitrogen ox‐
ide  (NOx)  emissions  only  when  the cars are undergoing strict
emission tests â was still present.

âThat is actually the single most inexplicable thing  about  this
whole  business,â  German said. âVW had a chance to fix the prob‐
lem, and they continued to try and cheat and  do  what  they  had
done. Thatâs just amazing.â

âOnly  then  did  VW admit it had designed and installed a defeat
device in these vehicles in the form of a sophisticated  software
algorithm  that  detected when a vehicle was undergoing emissions
testing,â the EPA said in a statement last week.

German said it was unclear how the defeat device software worked,
but  the software could work by detecting periods when the steer‐
ing column wasnât turning but the wheels were which  would  indi‐
cate the car was on dynamo‐meters for testing, or could also test
for the precise uniform temperature that the  tests  are  carried
out at.

âThe  kind of software it takes to first detect when youâre driv‐
ing on the official test would be very hard to develop. And  then
you  would  need  duplicate  software to tell the car to have two
different emission controls.â UK, France and Germany lobbied  for
flawed car emissions tests, documents reveal Read more

He said it was impossible to know how far up the food chain at VW
the fraudulent activity went, but said: âIt would have had to  be
quite  a  few  people involved. It certainly wonât have just been
one individual.â

German said VW could have continued in the deceit for  the  fore‐
seeable  future  if no one had thought to test the cars emissions
on real roads. He said there is no way to know if other car  com‐
panies may also have been using similar methods to trick official
emission tests, but welcomed UK, German and US  regulators  moves
to retest cars emissions on real roads.

German, who drives a 1997 Honda Accord station wagon that he says
has pretty good emissions for  a  manual  transmission,  said  he
hopes his work will act as a wake‐up call and scare the whole in‐
dustry into making certain that their vehicles  comply  with  all
emissions  regulations.  âCompanies should realise they might get
away with stuff for a little while, but it  will  catch  up  with
them.â

He  refused  to  enter  into discussion about what sort of action
should be taken against VW, which is facing a fine of up to $16bn
in  the  US  alone and a possible criminal investigation. âThatâs
really up to others, Iâm just an engineer from Michigan itâs  re‐
ally beyond my field of reach.â1


The Guardian 09-26-2015
NNNN
